
Linking between Mongo records
================================

Problem
-------

You have a Mongo record and want to include a link to another record.

Solution
--------

Create a reference using a `MongoRefField` such as `ObjectIdRefField` or `StringRefField`, and dereference the record using the `obj` call.

As an example we can create records representing countries, where a country references the planet where you can find it:

```scala
class Planet private() extends MongoRecord[Planet] with StringPk[Planet] {
  override def meta = Planet
  object review extends StringField(this,1024)
}

object Planet extends Planet with MongoMetaRecord[Planet] {
  override def collectionName = "example.planet"
}

class Country private () extends MongoRecord[Country] with StringPk[Country] {
  override def meta = Country
  object planet extends StringRefField(this, Planet, 128)
}

object Country extends Country with MongoMetaRecord[Country] {
  override def collectionName = "example.country"
}
```

In a snippet we can make us of the link:

```scala
class HelloWorld {

  val uk = Country.find("uk") openOr {
    val earth = Planet.createRecord.id("earth").review("Harmless").save(true)
    Country.createRecord.id("uk").planet(earth.id.is).save(true)
  }

  def facts = 
    ".country *" #> uk.id &
    ".planet" #> uk.planet.obj.map{ p =>
      ".name *" #> p.id &
      ".review *" #> p.review }
  }
```

For the value `uk` we lookup an existing record, or create one if none is found.  Note that `earth` is created as a separate Mongo record, and then referenced in the `planet` field with the id of the planet.

Retrieving the reference is via the `obj` method, which returns a `Box[Planet]` in this example.


Discussion
----------

Referenced records are fetched from Mongo when you call the `obj` method on a `MongoRefField`.  You can see this by turning on logging in the Mongo driver. Do this by adding the following to the start of your `Boot.scala`:

```scala
System.setProperty("DEBUG.MONGO", "true")
System.setProperty("DB.TRACE", "true")
```

Having done this, the first time you run the snippet above your console will include:

	INFO: find: scratch.example.country { "_id" : "uk"}
	INFO: update: scratch.example.planet { "_id" : "earth"} { "_id" : "earth" , 
	    "review" : "Harmless"}
	INFO: update: scratch.example.country { "_id" : "uk"} { "_id" : "uk" ,
	    "planet" : "earth"}
	INFO: find: scratch.example.planet { "_id" : "earth"}

What you're seeing here is the initial look up for "uk", followed by the creation of the "earth" record and an update which is saving the "uk" record.  Finally, there is a lookup of "earth" when `uk.obj` is called in the `fact` method.

The `obj` call will cache the `planet` reference.  That means you could say...

```scala
".country *" #> uk.id &
".planet *" #> uk.planet.obj.map(_.id) &
".review *" #> uk.planet.obj.map(_.review)
```

...and you'd still only see one query for the "earth" record despite calling `obj` multiple times.  The flip side of that is if the "earth" record was updated elsewhere in Mongo after you called `obj`, you would not see the change from a call to `uk.obj` unless you reloaded the `uk` record first.

### Querying by reference

Searching for records by a reference is straight-forward:

```scala
val earth : Planet = ...
val onEarth : List[Country]= Country.findAll(Country.planet.name, earth.id.is)
```

Or in this case, because we have String references, we could just say:

```scala
val onEarth : List[Country]= Country.findAll(Country.planet.name, "earth")
```

### Updating and deleting

Updating a reference is as you'd expect:

```scala
uk.planet.obj.foreach(_.review("Mostly harmless.").update)
```

This would result in:

	INFO: update: scratch.example.planet { "_id" : "earth"} { "\$set" : {
	   "review" : "Mostly harmless."}}

A `uk.planet.obj` call will now return a planet with the new review.

Or you could replace the reference with another:

```scala
uk.planet( Planet.createRecord.id("mars").save(true).id.is ).save(true)
```

To remove the reference:

```scala
uk.planet(Empty).save(true)
```
This removes the link, but the Mongo record pointed to by the link will remain in the database. If you remove the object being referenced, a later call to `obj` will return an `Empty` box.

### Types of link

The example uses a `StringRefField` as the Mongo records themselves use plain strings as `_id`s, and as such we had to set the size of the string we are storing (128).  Other reference types are:

* `ObjectIdRefField` - possibly the most frequently used kind of reference, when you want to reference via the usual default `ObjectId` reference in Mongo.
* `UUIDRefField` - for records with an id based on `java.util.UUID`.
* `StringRefField` - as used in this example.
* `IntRefField` and `LongRefField` - for when you're using a numeric value as an id.


See Also
--------

* [Mongo Record Referenced Objects](https://www.assembla.com/wiki/show/liftweb/Mongo_Record_Referenced_Objects) wiki page.
* [Configure logging for the MongoDB Java driver](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/9545341/configure-logging-for-the-mongodb-java-driver) on Stackoverflow.
